Egress blog part 2 (#4232)
istio/istio.io: content/blog/2019/egress-traffic-control-in-istio-part-2/index.md

---
title: Secure Control of Egress Traffic in Istio, part 2
subtitle: Use Istio Egress Traffic Control to prevent attacks involving egress traffic
description: Use Istio Egress Traffic Control to prevent attacks involving egress traffic.
publishdate: 2019-05-29
attribution: Vadim Eisenberg (IBM)
keywords: [traffic-management,egress,security]
---

This is part 2 in a new series about secure control of egress traffic in Istio.
In [the first part in the series](/blog/2019/egress-traffic-control-in-istio-part-1/), I presented the attacks involving
egress traffic and the requirements we collected for an egress traffic control system.
In this installment, I describe the Istio way for controlling egress traffic securely and show how Istio prevents the
attacks.

## Egress traffic control by Istio

> To implement secure egress traffic control in Istio, you must

Author: @rcaballeromx I wrote this post differently - first I tell the readers what they must do, and then I explain them how the steps they took prevent the attacks. It is like to tell the reader:

**The threat:** The attackers want to penetrate your house.
**What the reader should do:** Build a high fence and lock the gate, add a surveillance system.
**How it will prevent the attacks**: 
1. The attacker will try to climb over the fence - they will not be able since it is high. 
1. The attackers will try to open the gate - they will not be able since it is locked.
1. If the attackers will bring a ladder and climb over the fence, the surveillance system will still detect them.

The issue is that for the secure control of egress traffic you apply a set of mechanisms, and together they prevent all possible attacks (that I can think about).

[direct TLS traffic to external services through an egress gateway](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#egress-gateway-for-https-traffic).
(To support wildcard domains, you must create

> [a custom version of an egress gateway](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/wildcard-egress-hosts/)). Alternatively, you

Author: @rcaballeromx 

I removed the wildcard domains mentioning https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4232/commits/cb851b7f45b46fe9803f0a771ea33424f5151e3b.

I still propose to leave two main alternatives: 
1. TLS traffic
1. HTTP + TLS origination by the gateway

None is better than the other, the reader should choose it according to their circumstances. Each has its pros and cons.

can [direct HTTP traffic through an egress gateway](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#egress-gateway-for-http-traffic)
and [let the egress gateway perform TLS origination](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway-tls-origination/#perform-tls-origination-with-an-egress-gateway).

> In all cases you have to apply some

Author: @rcaballeromx I listed the security mechanisms in the link, why should I repeat them in this blog post?

> In all cases you have to apply some

Reviewer: @vadimeisenbergibm No need, just make sure you are giving readers enough guidance. Maybe:
```suggestion
We recommend you apply all [additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations), for example,
```

[additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations),
like [Kubernetes Network Policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) or an L3

> firewall that will enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See

Author: @rcaballeromx In security it is better to apply multiple security mechanisms, not a single one. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defense_in_depth_(computing)

> firewall that will enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See

Reviewer: @vadimeisenbergibm Then make that explicit in your text. Readers might not know that the best approach is to apply them all.

> firewall that will enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
firewall to enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See
```

[an example for Kubernetes Network Policies configuration](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#apply-kubernetes-network-policies).

You must also increase the security measures applied to the Istio control plane and the
egress gateway by running them on nodes separate from the application nodes, in a separate namespace, monitoring them

> more thoroughly, etc. After all, if the attackers are able to attack Istio Mixer or the egress gateway, they could

Author: @rcaballeromx Monitor the control plane _more thoroughly_ means more thoroughly than you monitor application pods. For example, if you perform some inspection on the application pods once a month, perform such inspection on the control plane once a week.

violate any policy.

Once you direct egress traffic through an egress gateway and apply the additional security mechanisms,

> you can securely monitor the traffic and define security policies on it.

Author: you can securely monitor the traffic and define security policies on it -> you can securely monitor and define security policies for the traffic

If the application sends HTTP requests and the egress gateway performs TLS origination, you can monitor HTTP
information, e.g. HTTP methods, headers and URL paths, and you can
[define policies](/blog/2018/egress-monitoring-access-control) based on the HTTP information. If the application
performs TLS origination, for TLS traffic you can
[monitor SNI and the service account](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress_sni_monitoring_and_policies/) of the

> source pod, and define policies based on them.

Author: monitor SNI and the service account of the source pod -> monitor SNI and the service account of the source pod's TLS traffic

> The following diagram shows Istio's security architecture, augmented with L3 firewall (part of the

Author: @rcaballeromx it should be "an L3 firewall", right? Pronounced _An el three firewall_.

[additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations)

> provided outside of Istio by the cluster/cloud provider).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4232/commits/fba3171130e3a553fc51d1b36972ea19904791c0. The meaning here is that someone (the reader, the cluster provider, should apply additional security mechanisms, outside of Istio).

The L3 firewall can have a trivial configuration that would allow incoming traffic into Istio ingress gateway pods only and
outgoing traffic from Istio egress gateway pods only. Note that the Istio proxy of the egress gateway performs

> policy enforcement and reporting in the same way as the sidecar proxies in the application pods.

Author: @rcaballeromx I do not understand this suggested change. Should I remove the sentence "Note that the Istio proxy of the egress gateway performs
policy enforcement and reporting in the same way as the sidecar proxies in the application pods." ?

> {{< image width="80%" link="./SecurityArchitectureWithL3Firewalls.svg" caption="Istio Security Architecture with Egress Gateway and L3 Firewall" >}}

Author: Fixed in 1e6abbd84d7a05397b525bd5e260f313252239bd.

Now let's examine possible attacks and let me show you how the secure control of egress traffic in Istio prevents them.

## Possible attacks and their prevention

Consider the following security policy with regard to egress traffic:

1. Application A is allowed to access `*.ibm.com` (all the external services with URL matching `*.ibm.com`,
  e.g. `www.ibm.com`)
1. Application B is allowed to access `mongo1.composedb.com`

> 1. All egress traffic must be monitored

Author: traffic must be monitored -> traffic is monitored

Now consider a scenario in which one of application A's pods is compromised. Suppose the attackers have the
following goals:

1. Application A will try to access `*.ibm.com` unmonitored
1. Application A will try to access `mongo1.composedb.com`

Note that application A is allowed to access `*.ibm.com`, so the attacker is able to access it. There is no way
to prevent such access since there is no way to distinguish, at least initially, between the original and the
compromised versions of application A. However, you want to monitor any access to external services to be able to
detect suspicious traffic, for example by applying anomaly detection tools on logs of the egress traffic.
The attackers, on the contrary, want to access external services unmonitored, so the attack will not be detected.
The second goal of the attackers is to access `mongo1.composedb.com`, which is forbidden for application A. Istio
must enforce the policy that forbids access of application A to `mongo1.composedb.com` and must prevent the attack.

Now let's see which attacks the attackers will try to perform to achieve their goals and how Istio secure egress traffic

> control will prevent each kind of attack. The attackers may try to:

Author: @rcaballeromx  I do not like this change:

1. Istio does not help to prevent, it actually prevents
2. Common attacks - I do not claim that these are common attacks, these are the attacks that came to my mind.

> 1. **Bypass** the container's sidecar proxy and access external services directly. This attack is prevented by a

Author: Here the meaning is different. The attackers want to access external services unmonitored, for that they may try to bypass the container's sidecar proxy. (they do not wish to access the container's sidecar proxy). 

The security mechanisms mentioned do not _help_ to prevent the attack, they actually prevent it. The readers might understand "Help to prevent" as to reduce probability of the attack, but still leave some possibility of the attack.

> 1. **Bypass** the container's sidecar proxy and access external services directly. This attack is prevented by a

Author: @rcaballeromx  "An egress 
  Kubernetes network policy or a properly configured L3 firewall help you prevent this type of attack, as discussed earlier in the post."

This does not explain how the attack is prevented. The attack is prevented by:
"a Kubernetes Network Policy or by an L3 firewall that allow egress traffic to exit the mesh only from the egress gateway." only from the egress gateway = not directly.

The attackers want to access the external service directly, the Kubernetes Network Policy or an L3 firewall force them to go through the gateway.

   Kubernetes Network Policy or by an L3 firewall that allow egress traffic to exit the mesh only from the egress
   gateway.

> 1. **Compromise** the egress gateway and force it to send fake information to the monitoring system or to disable

Author: Here the meaning is: the attackers compromise the gateway (break into it) in order to force it to send fake info.

   enforcement of the security policies.
   This attack is prevented by applying the special security measures to the egress gateway pods.

> 1. Since the previous attacks are prevented, the attackers have no other option but to direct the traffic through the

Author: @rcaballeromx _the attackers hope it will go undetected_ - the attackers cannot be so naive :) We are talking about the attackers who learned how Istio works and are trying to break various Istio mechanisms.

The same in the case your organization's security policies do not allow sending unencrypted HTTP requests
**inside the pod** (outside the pod the traffic is encrypted by Istio).

If the application sends HTTP requests and the egress gateway performs TLS origination, you can monitor HTTP
information like HTTP methods, headers, and URL paths. You can also
[define policies](/blog/2018/egress-monitoring-access-control) based on said HTTP information. If the application
performs TLS origination, you can
[monitor SNI and the service account](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress_sni_monitoring_and_policies/) of the
source pod's TLS traffic, and define policies based on SNI and service accounts.

In all cases you have to apply some
the [Kubernetes network policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) or an L3
firewall that will enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See
an example of the [Kubernetes network policies configuration](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#apply-kubernetes-network-policies).

> You must also increase the security measures applied to the Istio control plane pods and the egress gateway, for example:

Author: @rcaballeromx I want to tell the readers explicitly: you must increase the security measures applied to the Istio control plane. It means: 

Dear reader, whichever security measures you apply to your pods, increase them for the Istio control plane. Istio control plane must be more thoroughly protected than the application pods. I do not know which security measures you apply in your organization, I just can provide some examples of security measures.

violate any policy.

Once you direct egress traffic through an egress gateway and apply the additional security mechanisms,
you can securely monitor and enforce security policies for the traffic.

The following diagram shows Istio's security architecture, augmented with an L3 firewall which is part of the
[additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations)
that should be provided outside of Istio.

{{< image width="80%" link="./SecurityArchitectureWithL3Firewalls.svg" caption="Istio Security Architecture with Egress Gateway and L3 Firewall" >}}

You can configure the L3 firewall trivially to only allow incoming traffic through the Istio ingress gateway and
only allow outgoing traffic through the Istio egress gateway. The Istio proxies of the gateways enforce policies and report telemetry as all other proxies in the mesh.

Now let's examine possible attacks and let me show you how the secure control of egress traffic in Istio prevents them.

## Preventing possible attacks

Consider the following security policies for egress traffic:

> * Application **A** is allowed to access `*.ibm.com`, which includes all the external services with URLs matching

Author: Fixed

`*.ibm.com`.
* Application **B** is allowed to access `mongo1.composedb.com`.
* All egress traffic is monitored.

Suppose the attackers have the following goals:

1. To access `*.ibm.com` from your cluster.
1. To access `*.ibm.com` from your cluster, unmonitored. The attackers want their traffic to be unmonitored to prevent a
possibility that you will detect the forbidden access.

> 1. To access `mongo1.composedb.com` from your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access `mongo1.composedb.com` from your cluster.
```

> Now suppose that the attackers manage to break into one of the pods of application **A**. The attackers try to use the compromised pod to perform the forbidden access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now suppose that the attackers manage to break into one of the pods of application **A**, and try to use the compromised pod to perform the forbidden access.
```

> First, let's see which attacker's goals it is possible for you to thwart:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's see if we can thwart the attackers' goals:
```

> 1. Since application **A** is allowed to access `*.ibm.com`, the compromised pod is able to access it. There is no way to prevent such access since there is no way to distinguish, at

Reviewer: @vadimeisenbergibm I'm not sure these three items should be a list at all, let a lone an ordered list since they are not things that happen in sequence or that readers need to follow in a specific order. 
IMO, it could work as either a bullet list or just a paragraph. I favor the former.
The way the list is ordered, gives readers the impression that all you described was for nothing. My suggestion reorders the first item on the list to avoid that.
 ```suggestion
- Initially, there is no way to prevent a compromised application **A** to access `*.ibm.com`, because the compromised pod is able to access it indistinguishable from the original pod.
```

Author: @rcaballeromx Let me provide a high level flow of this subsection:

1. You have three security policies regarding the egress traffic in an example organization
2. The attackers manage to break into a pod (compromise it) and try to access external services
3. The attackers have three goals (three is accidental, not related to the number of policies).
4. You cannot prevent the first goal initially, only after you monitor and detect unusual traffic. You can prevent the second and third goals from the start.
5. The attackers have three possible attacks (that I know). Here three is accidental, the number of attacks does not have to correspond to the number of policies and the number of goals.

Author: @rcaballeromx this is why I wanted the list of goals and the list of what can be prevented as the numbered list, since they are related.

least initially, between the original and the compromised versions of the pod.

> 1. Fortunately, if you can monitor all

Reviewer: Don't force readers to go back to the previous list to understand the current one. Instead, just briefly mention the attacker's goal.
```suggestion
- Fortunately, you can monitor all access to external services, detect suspicious traffic, and thwart attackers from 
  gaining unmonitored access to `*.ibm.com`. For example, you could apply anomaly detection tools on the 
  egress traffic logs.
```

> access to external services, you could detect suspicious traffic and thwart the second goal of the attackers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For example, you could apply anomaly detection tools on the egress traffic logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. You can thwart the third goal if you can correctly detect the source of the traffic, in this case, application **A**,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To stop attackers from accessing `mongo1.composedb.com` from your cluster, you can correctly detect the source of the traffic, application **A** in this case,
```

> and check that it is not allowed to access the destination, `mongo1.composedb.com`, according to the security policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and verify that it is not allowed to access `mongo1.composedb.com` according to the security policies
```

mentioned above.

> Now, let's see which attacks malicious actors could attempt to achieve their goals and how secure control of egress

Reviewer: It's confusing to readers that you now move to other attack vectors. How do these relate to the attacks you mentioned on the previous list? It becomes even more confusing when you think about how the previous text mentioned "compromised pods" and "unmonitored access" which would fall under the categories you mention here, "Compromise" and "Bypass" respectively. Please merge the two lists into a single three Item list: Bypass, Compromise, Impersonate. Each item on the list should include: The description of the attack using the examples and the features and/or configurations that prevent the attack.

Author: @rcaballeromx Please note that there the attackers have three goals and they use three different attacks to achieve the goals. The number three is accidental, the number of possible attacks does not have to correspond to the number of goals.

Author: I rewrote that part in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4232/commits/1a82f2e5afeeb9d3a49212f7c3ff34fb47cf6bbd. The topic is tricky. The first list is related to the attackers trying to perform the forbidden access in a straightforward way, without any tricks. The second list is related to the tricks the attackers can perform.

Analogy to the real world:

Consider an airport policy: anyone from a wanted list of the police is not allowed to enter the airport building.
The attacker is in the wanted list of the police. His goal is to enter the airport building.
Security measures: put a police officer at the entrance to the building. Lock all the employees entrances.
The attacker can try his luck and to achieve his goal in a straightforward way - to enter through the main entrance. There he will be stopped by the police officer. The attacker can try a trick - to enter the building through an employees entrance. But since it is locked, this attack is prevented.

traffic in Istio will prevent each kind of attack. The attackers may try to:

* **Bypass** the container's sidecar proxy to be able to access any external service directly, without the sidecar's
   policy enforcement and reporting. This attack is prevented by a Kubernetes Network Policy or by an L3 firewall that
   allow egress traffic to exit the mesh only from the egress gateway.
* **Compromise** the egress gateway to be able to force it to send fake information to the monitoring system or to
   disable enforcement of the security policies. This attack is prevented by applying the special security measures to
   the egress gateway pods.

> Since the previous attacks are prevented, the attackers have no other option but to direct the traffic through the

Reviewer: While it's true that attackers might try the other attack vectors first, that is by no means certain. The text might give readers the wrong impression. This paragraph might be better suited as part of the "Impersonate" list item.

The same in the case your organization's security policies do not allow sending unencrypted HTTP requests
**inside the pod** (outside the pod the traffic is encrypted by Istio).

If the application sends HTTP requests and the egress gateway performs TLS origination, you can monitor HTTP
information like HTTP methods, headers, and URL paths. You can also
[define policies](/blog/2018/egress-monitoring-access-control) based on said HTTP information. If the application
performs TLS origination, you can
[monitor SNI and the service account](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress_sni_monitoring_and_policies/) of the
source pod's TLS traffic, and define policies based on SNI and service accounts.

In all cases you have to apply some

> [additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> like [Kubernetes Network Policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) or an L3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [Kubernetes network policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) or an L3
```

firewall that will enforce that traffic from the cluster to the outside is allowed for the egress gateway only. See

> [an example for Kubernetes Network Policies configuration](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#apply-kubernetes-network-policies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an example of the [Kubernetes network policies configuration](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#apply-kubernetes-network-policies).
```

---

Welcome to part 2 in our new series about secure control of egress traffic in Istio.
In [the first part in the series](/blog/2019/egress-traffic-control-in-istio-part-1/), I presented the attacks involving
egress traffic and the requirements we collected for a secure control system for egress traffic.
In this installment, I describe the Istio way to securely control the egress traffic, and show how Istio can help you
prevent the attacks.

## Secure control of egress traffic in Istio

To implement secure control of egress traffic in Istio, you must
[direct TLS traffic to external services through an egress gateway](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#egress-gateway-for-https-traffic).
Alternatively, you
can [direct HTTP traffic through an egress gateway](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#egress-gateway-for-http-traffic)
and [let the egress gateway perform TLS origination](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway-tls-origination/#perform-tls-origination-with-an-egress-gateway).

Both alternatives have their pros and cons, you should choose between them according to your circumstances.

> The choice would mainly depend on the question if your application can send unencrypted HTTP requests and if your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice mainly depends on whether your application can send unencrypted HTTP requests and whether your
```

information like HTTP methods, headers, and URL paths. You can also
[define policies](/blog/2018/egress-monitoring-access-control) based on said HTTP information. If the application
performs TLS origination, you can
[monitor SNI and the service account](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress_sni_monitoring_and_policies/) of the
source pod's TLS traffic, and define policies based on SNI and service accounts.

You must ensure that traffic from your cluster to the outside cannot bypass the egress gateway. Istio cannot enforce it
for you, so you must apply some
[additional security mechanisms](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#additional-security-considerations),
for example,
the [Kubernetes network policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) or an L3
firewall. See an example of the
[Kubernetes network policies configuration](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/egress-gateway/#apply-kubernetes-network-policies).
According to the [Defense in depth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defense_in_depth_(computing)) concept, the more
security mechanisms you apply for the same goal, the better.

> You must also insure that Istio control plane and the egress gateway cannot be compromised. While you may have hundreds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must also ensure that Istio control plane and the egress gateway cannot be compromised. While you may have hundreds
```

Now let's examine possible attacks and let me show you how the secure control of egress traffic in Istio prevents them.

## Preventing possible attacks

Consider the following security policies for egress traffic:

- Application **A** is allowed to access `*.ibm.com`, which includes all the external services with URLs matching
`*.ibm.com`.
- Application **B** is allowed to access `mongo1.composedb.com`.
- All egress traffic is monitored.

Suppose the attackers have the following goals:

- Access `*.ibm.com` from your cluster.
- Access `*.ibm.com` from your cluster, unmonitored. The attackers want their traffic to be unmonitored to prevent a
  possibility that you will detect the forbidden access.
- Access `mongo1.composedb.com` from your cluster.

Now suppose that the attackers manage to break into one of the pods of application **A**, and try to use the compromised
pod to perform the forbidden access. The attackers may try their luck and access the external services in a
straightforward way. You will react to the straightforward attempts as follows:

- Initially, there is no way to prevent a compromised application **A** to access `*.ibm.com`, because the compromised

>   pod is able to access it indistinguishable from the original pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pod is indistinguishable from the original pod.
```
